Summary of changes for 8.14 (#14908)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/changes.rst

Summary of changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq version 8.14 integrates many usability improvements, as well
as an important change in the core language. The main changes include:

  - The :ref:`internal representation <814CaseRepresentation>` of `match` has changed

>     to a more space-efficient and cleaner structure, allowing to fix a completeness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    to a more space-efficient and cleaner structure, allowing the fix of a completeness
```

>     issue in presence of cumulative inductive types in the type-checker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    issuefor cumulative inductive types in the type-checker.
```

Reviewer: Or better yet
```suggestion
    issue with cumulative inductive types in the type-checker.
```

    The internal representation is now closer to the user-level view of `match`,
    where the argument context of branches and the inductive binders `in` and `as`
    do not carry type annotations.

  - A :ref:`new <814CoqNative>` `coqnative` binary performs separate native compilation

>     of libraries, starting from a `vo` file, and is supported by `coq_makefile`.

Reviewer 2: I would use `.vo`.

    :ref:`Linking of native code libraries <814NativeLinking>` is now performed lazily,

>     bringing a gain of performance on some systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    bringing a performance gain on some systems.
```
sounds more natural to me

>     bringing a gain of performance on some systems.

Reviewer 3: Really a gain in performance? cc @ppedrot @ejgallego

Reviewer 4: I think that this entry refers to two different things. The second one has nothing to do with `coqnative`, it's really about linking in the Coq process, and indeed it's a workaround to OSX linking being slow.

Reviewer 3: Oh right, I've read too fast and thought this was a single thing. Maybe should be split in two bullet points then.

Author: I've just removed the second point which is minor.

>     bringing a gain of performance on some systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    improving performance on some systems.
```

Reviewer 5: Perhaps we should be more specific and say "some Mac systems"?

>   - :ref:`Improvements <814TCCanon>` of typeclasses and canonical structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - :ref:`Improvements <814TCCanon>` to typeclasses and canonical structure
```

    resolution, allowing more terms to be considered as classes or keys.

>   - More control of :ref:`notations <814Notations>` declarations and support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - More control over :ref:`notations <814Notations>` declarations and support
```

    for primitive types in string and numeral notations.

  - :ref:`Removal <814Tactics>` of deprecated tactics, notably `omega`, replaced by

>     a greatly improved `lia`, along with many bugfixes.

Reviewer 2: Need a comma after ``` `omega` ```

Also `bugfixes` -> `bug fixes`

>     a greatly improved `lia`, along with many bugfixes.

Reviewer: @jfehrle I fixed the first, but the second seems to be a word, albeit a newer one.

>     a greatly improved `lia`, along with many bugfixes.

Reviewer 2: https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/279941/what-is-the-difference-between-bug-fix-bugfix-bug-fixes-bug-fixing-and-fix-bu says

> Bug fix: Here fix means something that solves a problem, i. e. corrects a bug. For example, a patch can result in a bug fix.
> bugfix: (computing) A patch or change that fixes unwanted behaviour due to a bug.

The former seems a better fit here (solving problems).  IMHO the latter emphasizes the patch file or a commit as a distinct entity, which users don't care about in this case.

Google has it both ways:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/134252814-c7b5d5a6-7257-4a85-8674-5000d716886b.png)

>     a greatly improved `lia`, along with many bugfixes.

Reviewer: Yeah I guess it doesn't hurt to use the "proper" one.

>   - New APIs for interaction with Ltac1, manipulation of inductive types and
>     a Printf module in :ref:`Ltac2 <814Ltac2>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - New :ref:`Ltac2 <814Ltac2>` APIs for interaction with Ltac1, manipulation of inductive types and
    printing.
```

>   - CoqIDE now integrate an :ref:`Ltac debugger <814CoqIDE>`.

Reviewer: I suppose you meant
```suggestion
  - CoqIDE now integrates an :ref:`Ltac debugger <814CoqIDE>`.
```
also I must have missed this feature, how does it integrate it exactly?

Reviewer 3: Indeed, it seems to me that most of it was delayed to 8.15. The changes in 8.14 are not even documented AFAIK.

Reviewer 3: In fact, there is a minimalistic changelog entry and the `Set Ltac Debug` does not trigger the (documented) error message anymore. But it isn't clear to me that we should put this forward in the summary highlights, if only because @jfehrle intends to do a preview release of the full-blown Ltac-in-CoqIDE debugger as part of the Coq platform.

Reviewer 2: I would not mention the debugger at all.  The only user-visible bit that made it into 8.14 is allowing access to the existing command-line version of the debugger through the Messages window of CoqIDE.  That was an initial development step, hardly exciting for users.

I expect to put out a preview release of the debugger on top of 8.14 very soon after the initial release of 8.14.  Or, if 8.14 is not out within the next several days, maybe before.

> The changes in 8.14 are not even documented AFAIK.

Nope, they're not.

> full-blown Ltac-in-CoqIDE debugger

I'd say "useful" rather than "full-blown".  Still some interesting features to add.

Author: I've removed the point.

  - Many :ref:`changes and additions <814Stdlib>` to the standard library in the numbers,
    vectors and lists libraries. A new signed primitive integers library `Sint63`
    is available in addition to the unsigned `Uint63` library.

  - Coq has been :ref:`split <814Dune>` into `coq-core` and `coq-stdlib` packages

>     that are now built using `dune`.

Reviewer 3: Only the latter is always built with Dune. Also, something else that bothers me with this announcement is that we won't be able to do the same split for the packages in the opam-repository for now. So maybe also keep it for the 8.15 highlights when this (hopefully) becomes possible.

Author: Ok

See the `Changes in 8.14.0`_ section below for the detailed list of changes,
including potentially breaking changes marked with **Changed**.
Coq's `reference manual <https://coq.github.io/doc/v8.14/refman>`_,
`documentation of the standard library <https://coq.github.io/doc/v8.14/stdlib>`_
and `developer documentation of the ML API <https://coq.github.io/doc/v8.14/api>`_
are also available.

> Maxime Dénès, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Gaëtan Gilbert, Michael

Author: Yes, I did not update all the lists yet

> Soegtrop and Théo Zimmermann worked on maintaining and improving the

Reviewer 2: Do we usually list names in alphabetic order?

Author: Yes

continuous integration system and package building infrastructure.

Erik Martin-Dorel has maintained the `Coq Docker images
<https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq>`_ that are used in many Coq
projects for continuous integration.

The OPAM repository for Coq packages has been maintained by
Guillaume Claret, Karl Palmskog, Matthieu Sozeau and Enrico Tassi with
contributions from many users. A list of packages is available at
https://coq.inria.fr/opam/www/.

The `Coq Platform <https://github.com/coq/platform>`_ has been maintained

> by Enrico Tassi and Michael Soegtrop. TODO: It will soon have a release for Coq 8.14?

Reviewer 2: alphabetic order?

And what about the TODO?

> Our current 32 maintainers are Yves Bertot, Frédéric Besson, Tej

Reviewer 2: FWIW the exact number seems unimportant.

Author: Indeed

> Our current 32 maintainers are Yves Bertot, Frédéric Besson, Tej

Reviewer 3: It seems that this list was also copied verbatim from the last release. We are now up to 34 maintainers. If I'm not mistaken this list is missing @Alizter and @proux01 and should otherwise be accurate. BTW, the Coq Team page should probably be updated as well.

Author: Thanks

Chajed, Cyril Cohen, Pierre Corbineau, Pierre Courtieu, Maxime Dénès,
Jim Fehrle, Julien Forest, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Gaëtan Gilbert,
Georges Gonthier, Benjamin Grégoire, Jason Gross, Hugo Herbelin,
Vincent Laporte, Olivier Laurent, Assia Mahboubi, Kenji Maillard,
Guillaume Melquiond, Pierre-Marie Pédrot, Clément Pit-Claudel,
Kazuhiko Sakaguchi, Vincent Semeria, Michael Soegtrop, Arnaud Spiwack,
Matthieu Sozeau, Enrico Tassi, Laurent Théry, Anton Trunov, Li-yao Xia
and Théo Zimmermann. See the `Coq Team face book <https://coq.inria.fr/coq-team.html>`_
page for more details.

The 54 contributors to this version are Reynald Affeldt,
Arthur Azevedo de Amorim, Yves Bertot, Frédéric Besson, Lasse Blaauwbroek, Ana Borges,
Ali Caglayan, Cyril Cohen,  Columbus240, Pierre Courtieu, Maxime Dénès, Andrej Dudenhefner,
Jim Fehrle, Yannick Forster,  Simon Friis Vindum, Gaëtan Gilbert, Jason Gross, Samuel Gruetter, Stefan Haan,
Hugo Herbelin, Jasper Hugunin, Emilio Jesús Gallego Arias, Jacques-Henri Jourdan,
Ralf Jung, Jan-Oliver Kaiser, Fabian Kunze, Vincent Laporte, Olivier Laurent,
Yishuai Li, Barry M. Trager, Kenji Maillard, Erik Martin-Dorel, Guillaume Melquiond,

> Isaac Oscar Gariano, Pierre-Marie Pédrot, Rudy Peterson, Clément Pit-Claudel, shenlebantongying,
> slrnsc, Pierre Roux, Takafumi Saikawa, Kazuhiko Sakaguchi, Gabriel Scherer, Vincent Semeria,
> Avi Shinnar, Michael Soegtrop, Matthieu Sozeau, Enrico Tassi, Hendrik Tews, Anton Trunov,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Isaac Oscar Gariano, Pierre-Marie Pédrot, Rudy Peterson, Clément Pit-Claudel, Pierre Roux,
Takafumi Saikawa, Kazuhiko Sakaguchi, Gabriel Scherer, Vincent Semeria, shenlebantongying,
Avi Shinnar, slrnsc, Michael Soegtrop, Matthieu Sozeau, Enrico Tassi, Hendrik Tews, Anton Trunov,
```

Author: Right

Karolin Varner, Li-yao Xia, Beta Ziliani and Théo Zimmermann.

The Coq community at large helped improve the design of this new version via
the GitHub issue and pull request system, the Coq development mailing list
coqdev@inria.fr, the coq-club@inria.fr mailing list, the `Discourse forum
<https://coq.discourse.group/>`_ and the `Coq Zulip chat <http://coq.zulipchat.com>`_.

Version 8.14's development spanned 9 months from the release of

> Coq 8.13.0. Guillaume Melquiond is the release managers of Coq 8.14.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coq 8.13.0. Guillaume Melquiond is the release manager of Coq 8.14.
```

Summary of changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq version 8.14 integrates many usability improvements, as well
as an important change in the core language. The main changes include:

  - The :ref:`internal representation <814CaseRepresentation>` of `match` has changed
    to a more space-efficient and cleaner structure, allowing the fix a completeness
    issue with cumulative inductive types in the type-checker.
    The internal representation is now closer to the user-level view of `match`,
    where the argument context of branches and the inductive binders `in` and `as`
    do not carry type annotations.

  - A :ref:`new <814CoqNative>` `coqnative` binary performs separate native compilation
    of libraries, starting from a `.vo` file, and is supported by `coq_makefile`.

  - :ref:`Improvements <814TCCanon>` to typeclasses and canonical structure
    resolution, allowing more terms to be considered as classes or keys.

  - More control over :ref:`notations <814Notations>` declarations and support

>     for primitive types in string and numeral notations.

Reviewer 6: Maybe
```suggestion
    for primitive types in string and number notations.
```
since the command is now `Number Notation`?

Author: Indeed

as an important change in the core language. The main changes include:

  - The :ref:`internal representation <814CaseRepresentation>` of `match` has changed

>     to a more space-efficient and cleaner structure, allowing the fix a completeness

Reviewer 2: "the fix a" -> "the fix of a"

    issue with cumulative inductive types in the type-checker.
    The internal representation is now closer to the user-level view of `match`,
    where the argument context of branches and the inductive binders `in` and `as`
    do not carry type annotations.

  - A :ref:`new <814CoqNative>` `coqnative` binary performs separate native compilation

>     of libraries, starting from a `.vo` file, and is supported by `coq_makefile`.

Reviewer 2: "and is" -> "which is"

  - :ref:`Improvements <814TCCanon>` to typeclasses and canonical structure
    resolution, allowing more terms to be considered as classes or keys.

  - More control over :ref:`notations <814Notations>` declarations and support
    for primitive types in string and numeral notations.

  - :ref:`Removal <814Tactics>` of deprecated tactics, notably `omega`, which has
    been replaced by a greatly improved `lia`, along with many bug fixes.

  - New  :ref:`Ltac2 <814Ltac2>` APIs for interaction with Ltac1, manipulation of

>     inductive types and printing..

Reviewer 2: Remove extra period.

Author: Well spotted

  Makefiles produced by ``coq_makefile`` now use ``.DELETE_ON_ERROR``
  (`#14238 <https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/14238>`_,
  by Gaëtan Gilbert).
- **Removed:**
  Previously deprecated command line options
  ``-sprop-cumulative`` and ``-input-state`` and its alias ``-is``
  (`#13822 <https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/13822>`_,

>   by Gaëtan Gilbert).

Reviewer 3: Why has this been moved up? We generally try to keep changes gathered by categories. Here this inserts a **Removed** between two **Changed**.

Author: It's just to group all the native stuff together.

Reviewer 3: Hum, in this case what about inserting a new category? This is something that we've done in the past when there were many related changes (8.12 had "Reals library", "Extraction" and "Reference manual" in addition to the usual stuff). It doesn't have to be a new permanent category.
